---
layout: post
title: UNIX 98 pseudoterminals briefly explained
---

Quite some time ago, I was experimenting with UNIX 98 pseudoterminals.
A pseudoterminal is a device (or more specifically, a device pair) that has the same semantics as a regular TTY terminal except that its other end is connected to a process.
The device that offers TTY semantics is refered to as the _pseudoterminal slave_, while the other end is known as the _master_.
In other words, a pseudoterminal can be used to communicate two processes where one of them sees the channel as a TTY.
For more information, see `pts(4)`.
This is especially useful, e.g. to implement a terminal emulator or a remote login program.

In short, issuing `open()` on the `/dev/ptmx` device (PseudoTerminal MultipleXor) results in the creation of a new master-slave device pair.
The file descriptor returned by `open()` refers to the pseudoterminal master; the path to the matching slave end can be obtained via `ptsname()`.
`grantpt()` should be called before trying to open the slave side in order to set the mode and owner of the device.

Fair enough.
I thought that a good exercise would be to combine this with a TCP/IPv4 socket, forwarding traffic between the pseudoterminal master and the socket.
In the gist below, `select()` is also used to wait for incoming data on both ends and two extra pipes + `splice()` are used to perform zero-copy transfers.

{% gist e375af24f10bf079887254a6b2243a62 pseudoterminal_tcp.c %}
